.TH ZORVIX 3 "2025" "zorvix 2.0.2" "Node.js Library Functions"
Node.js API for embedding a static HTTP/HTTPS server with REST routing
.nf
.B import { createServer, serve, createBodyParser } from 'zorvix';
.PP
.BI "const server = createServer(" options ");"
.PP
.BI "serve(" options ", async (server) => {    // single-process"
.BI "    await server.start();"
.BI "});"
.PP
.BI "serve(" options ", " modulePath ");       // cluster mode (workers: true)"
.PP
.BI "server.use(" handler ");"
.BI "server.use(" path ", " handler ");"
.PP
.BI "server.get(" routePath ", " handler ");"
.BI "server.post(" routePath ", " handler ");"
.BI "server.put(" routePath ", " handler ");"
.BI "server.patch(" routePath ", " handler ");"
.BI "server.delete(" routePath ", " handler ");"
.BI "server.head(" routePath ", " handler ");"
.BI "server.options(" routePath ", " handler ");"
.PP
.BI "await server.start();"
.BI "await server.stop();"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B zorvix
package exports two factory functions and a body-parsing middleware factory.
.BR createServer ()
creates and returns a
.B ServerInstance
directly; it is the right choice for single-process use.
.BR serve ()
is the cluster-safe entrypoint.
.PP
Both functions produce the same
.B ServerInstance
object, which exposes methods for registering middleware and routes and for
controlling the server lifecycle.
All registration methods return
.I this
so that calls may be chained.
Unmatched
.B GET
and
.B HEAD
requests automatically fall through to the built-in static file handler.
Any other method that is not matched by a registered route returns
.B "405 Method Not Allowed"
with an
.B Allow
header.
.SH TYPES
The package ships a bundled TypeScript declaration file.
The types listed here are also valid TypeScript interfaces.
.SH createServer(options)
.TP
.B Signature
.nf
createServer(options: ServerOptions): ServerInstance
.fi
.PP
Creates and configures a server instance.
No socket is bound until
.BR server.start() ,
but middleware and routes may be registered immediately after this call.
.PP
When
.B options.workers
is
.B true
and the calling process is the cluster primary,
.BR createServer ()
returns a lightweight primary-only instance whose route-registration
methods are accepted but silently discarded (the primary never dispatches
requests).
The worker process is bootstrapped from the library's internal
.B worker-bootstrap
module, which dynamically imports the setup module path supplied to
.BR serve ()
and calls
.BR createServer ()
with the stored options to obtain a full server instance.
.SH serve(options, setup)
.TP
.B Signature
.nf
serve(options: ServerOptions, setup: string): void
serve(options: ServerOptions, setup: (server: ServerInstance) => void | Promise<void>): void | Promise<void>
.fi
.PP
Cluster-safe application entrypoint.
The behaviour of
.I setup
differs depending on
.B options.workers
and the calling process role.
.PP
When
.B options.workers
is
.B true
and the calling process is the cluster primary,
.I setup
must be a resolved absolute module path (a
.BR string ).
.BR serve ()
validates that the path exists on disk, stores it in the environment, and forks
a supervised worker that dynamically imports the setup module.
The primary never invokes the setup module directly.
Use
.B fileURLToPath(new URL('./app.js', import.meta.url))
to obtain a portable absolute path.
Passing a function as
.I setup
when
.B workers
is
.B true
throws
.BR TypeError .
.PP
In single-process mode
.RB ( workers: false ,
the default) or when called from inside a worker,
.I setup
must be a function.
.BR serve ()
calls it immediately with a fully configured
.BR ServerInstance .
Call
.BR server.start ()
inside the callback to begin accepting connections.
If the callback throws or returns a rejected Promise,
.BR serve ()
logs the error and calls
.B process.exit(1)
to prevent a silent failure.
Passing a non-function as
.I setup
in this configuration throws
.BR TypeError .
.SH ServerOptions
.TP
.B port \fI(number, required)\fR
TCP port to listen on.
.TP
.B root \fI(string, optional)\fR
Directory from which static files are served.
Resolved to an absolute path via
.BR path.resolve (3js).
Defaults to
.BR process.cwd() .
.TP
.B logging \fI(boolean, optional)\fR
When
.BR true ,
each incoming request is logged as
.B Client:\~METHOD\~URL
and significant server events (cache activity, gzip timing, DevTools
connection, start/stop) are written to stdout.
Default:
.BR false .
.TP
.B devTools \fI(boolean, optional)\fR
When
.BR true ,
a JSON endpoint is registered at
.sp
.in +4n
.EX
/.well-known/appspecific/com.chrome.devtools.json
.EE
.in
.sp
The response is a gzip-compressed JSON object containing the workspace
.B root
and a randomly-generated
.B uuid
that scopes the endpoint for this server process.
Default:
.BR false .
.TP
.B workers \fI(boolean, optional)\fR
Enable cluster mode.
When
.B true
and the process is the cluster primary, a worker is forked and supervised;
the primary restarts the worker after 500\~ms on unexpected exit.
When using
.B workers: true
prefer
.BR serve ()
over
.BR createServer ()
to guarantee that the code is only executed in the worker.
Default:
.BR false .
.TP
.B cache \fI(boolean, optional)\fR
Enable the in-memory file cache.
When
.BR false ,
every static-file request is served directly from disk; no cache entries are
created and no pruning interval is started.
Useful during development or when
.B devTools
is enabled and files change frequently.
Default:
.BR true .
.TP
.B key \fI(string\~|\~Buffer, optional)\fR
PEM-encoded TLS private key, supplied either as a filesystem path (string)
or as already-loaded key material (Buffer).
Must be supplied together with
.BR cert .
When both
.B key
and
.B cert
are present the server uses
.B https.createServer
instead of
.BR http.createServer .
.TP
.B cert \fI(string\~|\~Buffer, optional)\fR
PEM-encoded TLS certificate, supplied as a filesystem path or Buffer.
Must be supplied together with
.BR key .
.SH ServerInstance
.SS server.use(handler)
.SS server.use(path, handler)
.PP
Register a middleware function.
.PP
.nf
.B server.use(handler: RequestHandler): ServerInstance
.B server.use(path: string, handler: RequestHandler): ServerInstance
.fi
.PP
Without a
.I path
argument the handler runs for every request.
With a
.I path
argument it runs only when the request URL equals
.I path
or starts with
.IR path /
(the prefix is normalised to have a leading slash and no trailing slash).
.PP
Middleware runs in registration order, before route handlers and before
static file serving.
A middleware handler must either end the response or call
.B next()
to pass control to the next handler in the chain.
Passing a value to
.B next(err)
aborts the chain; the error propagates to the top-level handler, which
returns
.BR "500 Internal Server Error"
if the response has not yet been sent.
.PP
Returns
.I this
for chaining.
Throws
.B TypeError
when a
.I path
is given without a corresponding
.IR handler .

.SS Route registration methods
.PP
Each of the following methods registers a handler for requests that match
the given HTTP method and
.IR routePath :
.PP
.nf
.B server.get(routePath: string, handler: RequestHandler): ServerInstance
.B server.post(routePath: string, handler: RequestHandler): ServerInstance
.B server.put(routePath: string, handler: RequestHandler): ServerInstance
.B server.patch(routePath: string, handler: RequestHandler): ServerInstance
.B server.delete(routePath: string, handler: RequestHandler): ServerInstance
.B server.head(routePath: string, handler: RequestHandler): ServerInstance
.B server.options(routePath: string, handler: RequestHandler): ServerInstance
.fi
.PP
All return
.I this
for chaining.
.PP
Route paths are compiled into regular expressions at registration time.
The supported pattern syntax is:
.TP
.BI : name
Matches a single path segment (no slashes).
The captured value is available as
.BR req.params. \fIname\fR.
.TP
.B *
Matches everything including slashes.
The captured value is available as
.B req.params['0']
(the index increments for each wildcard in the pattern).
.PP
All other regex-special characters in the route path are escaped before
compilation.
.SS server.start()
.PP
.nf
.B server.start(): Promise<void>
.fi
.PP
Binds the server to the configured port and begins accepting connections.
Also starts the in-memory cache pruning interval when
.B cache
is not
.B false
(the default).
.PP
Returns a
.B Promise
that resolves once the server is listening, or rejects if the port cannot
be bound (e.g.\&
.BR EADDRINUSE )
or if the server is already listening.
.PP
In cluster mode (primary process), resolves after the worker process has
been forked; the actual socket is not bound until the worker calls
.BR start() .
.SS server.stop()
.PP
.nf
.B server.stop(): Promise<void>
.fi
.PP
Gracefully stops the server.
Idle connections are closed immediately.
Active connections are given 5\~seconds to finish; any still open after
that grace period are forcibly terminated.
.PP
Returns a
.B Promise
that resolves once the server has fully stopped, or immediately if it was
not listening.
.PP
In cluster mode (primary process), sends
.B SIGINT
to each worker and resolves once all workers have exited.
.SS server.root \fI(readonly string)\fR
.PP
The resolved absolute path of the static-file root directory.
.SS server.port \fI(readonly number)\fR
.PP
The port number passed to
.BR createServer() .
.SS server.listening \fI(readonly boolean)\fR
.PP
.B true
between a successful
.BR server.start()
and the completion of
.BR server.stop() .
.SS server.server \fI(readonly http.Server\~|\~https.Server)\fR
.PP
The underlying Node.js
.B http.Server
or
.B https.Server
instance.
Useful for attaching socket-level event listeners or for integrating with
WebSocket libraries.
.PP
Accessing this property from the cluster primary process throws
.BR Error .
.SH RequestHandler
.nf
.B type RequestHandler = (
.B "    req:  http.IncomingMessage,"
.B "    res:  http.ServerResponse,"
.B "    next: NextFunction,"
.B ) => void | Promise<void>
.PP
.B type NextFunction = (err?: unknown) => void | Promise<void>
.fi
.PP
Handler functions receive the standard Node.js
.B IncomingMessage
and
.B ServerResponse
objects, augmented with the following fields:
.TP
.B req.params \fI(Record<string, string>)\fR
Named URL parameters extracted from the matched route pattern.
Always present as an empty object
.B {}
for middleware and static-file requests that did not match a named route.
.TP
.B req.body \fI(unknown | undefined)\fR
Parsed request body.
.B undefined
until a body-parsing middleware populates it.
Type-narrowing is the caller's responsibility.
.TP
.B req.query \fI(Record<string, string | string[]>)\fR
Parsed query-string parameters from the request URL.
Multi-value keys (e.g.\&
.BR ?tag=a&tag=b )
are collected into an array; single-value keys produce a plain string.
Always present \(em populated before the first middleware runs.
An empty object
.B {}
when the request has no query string.
.TP
.B res.json(data, status?)
Serialise
.I data
as JSON and send a complete response.
Sets
.B Content-Type: application/json
and
.B Content-Length
automatically.
.I status
defaults to
.BR 200 .
.TP
.B res.html(markup, status?)
Send
.I markup
as an HTML response.
Sets
.B Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
and
.B Content-Length
automatically.
.I status
defaults to
.BR 200 .
.SH HANDLER EXECUTION ORDER
Handlers are executed strictly in registration order:
.PP
.nf
global middleware
  → path-prefixed middleware (when URL matches prefix)
    → matching method route
      → static file serving  (GET / HEAD only)
.fi
.PP
.B GET
and
.B HEAD
requests that do not match any registered route fall through to static
file serving.
Any other method that reaches the end of the chain without being handled
returns
.B "405 Method Not Allowed"
with an
.B Allow
header containing the methods for which a route is registered on that path.
.SH STATIC FILE SERVING
Unmatched
.B GET
and
.B HEAD
requests are handled by the built-in static file layer:
.TP
.B ETag / Last-Modified
Every response includes
.B ETag
(SHA-1 digest for cached files; mtime-based for large streamed files) and
.B Last-Modified
headers.
.B If-None-Match
and
.B If-Modified-Since
are honoured with
.B "304 Not Modified"
responses.
.TP
.B Range requests
.B Accept-Ranges: bytes
is advertised.
.B Range
,
.b Multi-Range
and
.B If-Range
headers are supported.
.TP
.B Gzip
Compressible MIME types are compressed when the client sends
.BR "Accept-Encoding: gzip" .
.TP
.B Content-Disposition
Binary / archive MIME types are served with
.B "Content-Disposition: attachment"
so that browsers download rather than render them.
.TP
.B Path traversal
Resolved paths that escape the root return
.BR "400 Bad Request" .
.SH BUILT-IN MIDDLEWARE
Two middleware functions are always registered internally, in order, before
any user-supplied handlers:
.TP
.B Logging middleware
Present only when
.B options.logging
is
.BR true .
Prints
.B Client:\~METHOD\~URL
for each request.
.TP
.B Guard middleware
Always present.
Rejects URLs longer than 2048\~bytes with
.B "414 URI Too Long"
and requests with more than 50 headers with
.BR "431 Request Header Fields Too Large" .
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B "TypeError: [zorvix] serve(): When workers is true, `setup` must be a module path string."
.BR serve ()
was called with
.B workers: true
from the cluster primary but
.I setup
was a function instead of a module path string.
Move the setup callback into a separate file with a default export and pass its
resolved absolute path instead.
.TP
.B "TypeError: [zorvix] serve(): When workers is false (or not set), `setup` must be a function."
.BR serve ()
was called in single-process mode (or from inside a worker) but
.I setup
was not a function.
.TP
.B "Error: [zorvix] serve(): Setup module not found at path: ..."
The resolved path passed as
.I setup
to
.BR serve ()
does not exist on disk.
.TP
.B TypeError: use(path, handler): handler is required
.BR server.use ()
was called with a string path but no handler argument.
.TP
.B Error: Server is already listening
.BR server.start ()
was called on an already-started server instance.
.TP
.B Error: [zorvix] .server is not available in the cluster primary process
.B server.server
was accessed from within the cluster primary.
Use it from the worker instead.
.TP
.B EADDRINUSE
The configured port is already in use.
The promise returned by
.BR server.start ()
rejects with this OS error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Minimal HTTP server
.nf
import { createServer } from 'zorvix';

const server = createServer({ port: 3000 });
await server.start();
.fi
.SS Static server with logging and a custom route
.nf
import { createServer } from 'zorvix';

const server = createServer({
    port:    8080,
    root:    './public',
    logging: true,
});

server.get('/healthz', (req, res) => {
    res.writeHead(200, { 'Content-Type': 'text/plain' });
    res.end('ok');
});

await server.start();
.fi
.SS Global and path-scoped middleware
.nf
import { createServer } from 'zorvix';

const server = createServer({ port: 3000, logging: true });

// Runs for every request
server.use((req, res, next) => {
    res.setHeader('X-Custom-Header', 'hello');
    next();
});

// Runs only when URL starts with /api
server.use('/api', (req, res, next) => {
    if (!req.headers['x-api-key']) {
        res.writeHead(401, { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' });
        res.end(JSON.stringify({ error: 'Unauthorised' }));
        return;
    }
    next();
});

server
    .get('/api/users', (req, res) => {
        res.writeHead(200, { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' });
        res.end(JSON.stringify([{ id: 1, name: 'Alice' }]));
    })
    .get('/api/users/:id', (req, res) => {
        res.writeHead(200, { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' });
        res.end(JSON.stringify({ id: req.params.id }));
    })
    .delete('/api/users/:id', (req, res) => {
        res.writeHead(204);
        res.end();
    });

await server.start();
.fi
.SS HTTPS with pre-loaded key material
.nf
import { createServer } from 'zorvix';
import fs from 'node:fs';

const server = createServer({
    port: 443,
    key:  fs.readFileSync('./certs/server.key'),
    cert: fs.readFileSync('./certs/server.crt'),
});

await server.start();
.fi
.SS Cluster mode
.nf
// app.js \(em setup module; default export receives the ServerInstance
export default async function(server) {
    await db.connect();

    server.get('/users/:id', async (req, res) => {
        res.json(await db.findUser(req.params.id));
    });

    await server.start();
}

// entry.js \(em cluster entrypoint
import { serve } from 'zorvix';
import { fileURLToPath } from 'url';

// When workers: true the primary forks a worker that imports app.js.
// The setup module is never executed in the primary process.
serve(
    { port: 3000, workers: true },
    fileURLToPath(new URL('./app.js', import.meta.url)),
);
.fi
.SS Single-process serve()
.nf
import { serve } from 'zorvix';

serve({ port: 3000 }, async (server) => {
    server.get('/healthz', (req, res) => res.json({ ok: true }));
    await server.start();
});
.fi
.SS Query-string parameters
.nf
import { createServer } from 'zorvix';

const server = createServer({ port: 3000 });

// GET /search?q=hello&tag=a&tag=b
// req.query \(-> { q: 'hello', tag: ['a', 'b'] }
server.get('/search', (req, res) => {
    const { q, tag } = req.query;
    res.json({ q, tag });
});

await server.start();
.fi
.SS Response helpers (res.json and res.html)
.nf
import { createServer } from 'zorvix';

const server = createServer({ port: 3000 });

server.get('/data', (req, res) => {
    res.json({ hello: 'world' });
});

server.get('/page', (req, res) => {
    res.html('<h1>Hello</h1>');
});

server.get('/not-found', (req, res) => {
    res.json({ error: 'Not found' }, 404);
});

await server.start();
.fi
.SS Body parsing with createBodyParser
.nf
import { createServer, createBodyParser } from 'zorvix';

const server = createServer({ port: 3000 });

server.use(createBodyParser());

server.post('/users', (req, res) => {
    const { name } = req.body;
    res.json({ created: name }, 201);
});

await server.start();
.fi
.SS Disabling the in-memory cache (development mode)
.nf
import { createServer } from 'zorvix';

const server = createServer({
    port:     3000,
    devTools: true,
    cache:    false,   // serve every file fresh from disk
});

await server.start();
.fi
.SS Graceful shutdown on SIGTERM
.nf
import { createServer } from 'zorvix';

const server = createServer({ port: 3000 });
await server.start();

process.on('SIGTERM', async () => {
    await server.stop();
    process.exit(0);
});
.fi
.SS Accessing the underlying Node.js server
.nf
import { createServer } from 'zorvix';
import { WebSocketServer } from 'ws';

const server = createServer({ port: 3000 });
await server.start();

// Attach a WebSocket server to the same http.Server
const wss = new WebSocketServer({ server: server.server });
wss.on('connection', (ws) => ws.send('connected'));
.fi
.SH REQUIREMENTS
Node.js 22 or later.
No runtime npm dependencies.
TypeScript typings are included in the package.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR zorvix (1),
.BR node (1),
.BR http (7)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/DanielLMcGuire/Zorvix/issues
.UE .
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel McGuire.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
